Host qualification GL follow-up — 2026-10-01

User-run fixed source: /tmp/libva-host-source-vb44oco9
Results: /tmp/libva-host-qualification.wTcndX

Observed: 57 Python tests, 193 injected Rust tests passed. Hardware CPU
sample-1, sample-30 and sample-full matched native output. GStreamer export
reached the driver. Strict GL produced 18 frames against 300 reference frames.
The kernel window reported zero firmware errors, warnings and power cycles.
The gate stopped at GL; subsequent matrix and lifecycle probes did not run.

At seq=18, START followed the previous synchronous STOP before its empty
CAPTURE marker was dequeued. Replay filled OUTPUT slots; the delayed empty
CAPTURE was classified as a new firmware abort. Rebuild then failed its FIFO
ownership check. The trace shows output pacing stall and Dead surfaces.

Narrow fix: track the post-START empty marker separately from EOS. Consume
one empty marker while not draining, or expire the allowance on the first
nonempty capture, including ownerless replay. An additional unexpected empty
capture remains eligible for the existing fatal classification. Retain bounds,
strict frame count/order, cache maintenance and independent kernel checks.

Host unit regression checks one-shot consumption and that an active drain
cannot spend a previous START allowance. Hardware validation of this fix is
pending. Repeated STOP/replay remains a performance and reference-recovery
risk; this change does not qualify production or prove 300-frame GL parity.

Second user run: /tmp/libva-host-qualification.A1KZRr
The marker fix worked: the delayed empty CAPTURE was recognized, no FIFO
rebuild was attempted. CPU 300-frame parity and clean kernel window repeated.
GL remained at 18/300 frames. OUTPUT retained 11 buffers after replay while
normal submission waited for the two-buffer pacing limit. Replay had filled
all OUTPUT buffers before pumping and before normal CAPTURE replenishment.

Follow-up source fix: replenish stable working CAPTURE before replay and
while pumping; pace replay at the same OUTPUT limit as ordinary submission,
with the existing source-change exception and whole-GOP wait budget. Preserve
abandonment on incomplete references and errors. Pacing failures now include
queue counts/state in logs. 202 integrated Rust tests and strict Clippy pass.
A fresh fixed source with a GL-only host runner is prepared at
/tmp/libva-gl-pacing-source-c_pnm7vt. Hardware result remains pending; no claim
that the starvation hypothesis or complete GL parity is proved by host tests.

Third user run: /tmp/libva-host-gl-check.qMG2Ca
GL still produced 18/300 frames, with a clean kernel window. New diagnostics
showed out=2/16, cap=6/32, no FIFO owners and no abort. This rules out the
previous full-OUTPUT hypothesis as sufficient explanation. The pacing and
replenishment changes did not resolve the hardware failure.

Trace/kernel finding: START was issued before the previous STOP's empty
completion was dequeued. Local Linux iris_vdec_start_cmd clears vb2's
last_buffer_dequeued; vb2_dqbuf sets it again when dequeue returns LAST.
Thus dequeuing a late LAST after START can leave CAPTURE DQBUF stopped even
while firmware has resumed. Hardware logs did not previously include flags,
so matching the actual late buffer's LAST flag still needs confirmation.

Fix: track dequeue of LAST while draining; include that completion in the
existing bounded drain-before-replay wait. START cannot precede the LAST
DQBUF. A slow drain remains retryable and no pending owners are discarded.
Successful STOP resets the completion flag; START resets it for the next
cycle. New CAPTURE logs include flags. Existing synthetic completed-drain
fixtures now explicitly carry LAST completion; stale LAST is cleared by a
new STOP. Hardware result remains pending at fixed source
/tmp/libva-gl-last-source-z88fqfmg. Do not claim release readiness.

Fourth user run: /tmp/libva-host-gl-check.5HPJnr
Fixed source: /tmp/libva-gl-last-source-z88fqfmg
Strict GL PASSED: 300/300 frames in display order, zero missing/tolerated
frames, matching 1280-byte strides. Wrapped command exit 0. Kernel window:
zero session/system errors, power cycles, vb2 warnings or kernel bugs.
This qualifies the supplied GL stream on the staged binary and current kernel.
Full production matrix, churn, EOS and seek on this source remain required.
Kernel patch boot, small-stream compatibility, 4K/browser performance and AV1
release blockers are not closed by this isolated 720p GL result.

Production continuation: /tmp/libva-host-qualification.OQuT34
The same binary again passed CPU 1/30/300 parity, GStreamer export and strict
GL 300/300. The next optional hwmap diagnostic stalled in terminal job-control
stop: FFmpeg omitted -nostdin; both FFmpeg and its timeout were stopped in a
background terminal group. The run was terminated and its lease released.
Corrected verifier adds -nostdin; corrected exact-binary host runner also
redirects stdin from /dev/null. Host execution requested:
bash /tmp/libva-exact-production-stdin-20261001/run-production-exact.sh
No final kernel-window summary or subsequent lifecycle results exist for this
interrupted run. Full diagnosis: docs/production-stall-diagnosis-20261001.txt.

Direct continuation completed after environment recheck (2026-10-01):
/tmp/libva-exact-production-results.e1tXqa passed CPU/GL, resolution, long and
HEVC/Main10/VP9 with clean kernel; strict production fails native one-frame EOS.
/tmp/libva-exact-lifecycle-results.jezSwc passed churn7/7 and EOS; seek failed.
Startup RPC race fixed, but corrected seek/debug runs expose empty-CAPTURE
abort and recovery FIFO mismatch. See docs/production-host-continuation-20261001.txt.
Hardware is currently accessible directly; prior host-request limitation is obsolete.
